In this section of the course,
we're going to start looking
at discriminative models.
We're going to look at how they contrast
with generative models that we've
looked at so far.
And in particular, go through a detailed
examination of Maxent entropy models.
So far,
we've been looking at generative models.
In particular, we've looked at language
models and Naive Bayes models.
But in addition to these generate models,
there's now much use of conditional or
discriminative in natural
language processing.
And also in related fields like speech and
information retrieval or
machine learning more generally, and
that's for a couple of good reasons.
These models tend to have very
high accuracy performance.
And also they're
linguistically interesting,
because they make it easy to include lots
of linguistically important features.
And hence, they easily allow
the building of language independent
we talked about NLP systems.
So, let me now contrast joint
versus discriminative models.
In both cases, we're going to
assume that we have some data (d,c)
of paired observation of the data d and
the hidden classes c.
And so, the defining characteristic
of joint models is that they place
probabilities over both the observed
data and the hidden stuff.
So we have the probability of (c and d).
And commonly, the way that's done
is there is a generative model, so
that generative models generate
the observed data from the hidden stuff.
These kind of joint or
generative models comprise all
the classic statistical NLP models.
Not only n-gram models in Naive Bayes
classifiers that we see already, but
also hidden mock off models,
probabilistic context free grammars and
the IBM machine translation
alignment models.
In contrast discriminative or
conditional models more directly target
the classification decision
that we want to make.
Formally, they put probability
distributions that are conditional,
the probability of
the class given the data.
Discriminative models
include logistic regression.
Or in general, the whole area
of conditional loglinear models,
including a particular
Maxent entropy models and
their generalization to sequences,
conditional random fields.
Many other machine learning methods,
such as SVMs, perceptrons or
averaged perceptrons are also
discriminative classifiers, but
they're not directly probabilistic models.
One way of showing the difference between
the two model classes is by means of
the graphical model diagrams that are used
for probabilistic models in general.
In these diagrams, we draw circles for
random variables and
lines for
direct dependencies between them.
And some of the variables are normally
observed and others are hidden, and
then for each node is like a little
classifier based on its incoming arcs.
If we draw these kind of models,
what we find is that for
a Naive Bayes model,
the picture looks like this.
So at classification time,
we are observing the various
words of the document,
which is our given data.
And based on those,
we want to predict the class.
But in terms of the probabilistic model,
our probability factors,
our prior probability of the class and
then the probability of the words
in the document given the class.
And so, that we have this generative
direction in which the words are generated
from the class rather than actually
predicting what we haven't observed.
In a discriminative model such as logistic
regression, the situation is the opposite.
We've again, observed the words of the
document and want to predict the class.
But this time, we're directly putting
the probability over the class
given all of the data that we've observed,
d1, d2, d3.
So in generative models, we look at
the joint probability over the data and
the class and what we try and do is
attempt to maximize this joint likelihood.
And as we've already seen,
that the categorical models is trivial
to optimize the joint likelihood.
All we do is take the relative
frequencies of different events.
That is we count how often
different things occur and
then we divide by a normalizing
denominator, and we're done.
So, that's very practical for estimation.
In contrast, the conditional model,
we want to work out these
probabilities of (c given d).
And so in a conditional model,
what we'll do is attempt to directly
maximize the conditional likelihood.
The probability of the classes
observed given the data.
As we'll see,
this turns out to be much harder to do.
But it is perhaps, more useful,
because it's more directly related
to classifications, excess or error.
This slide gives some
initial motivation for
being interested in conditional models by
showing that they have high performance.
In this slide, I show the results of
some experiments done by Dan Klein and
me in 2002.
The task here is word sense
disambiguation, but essentially that's
the same task as text classification
that we've looked at earlier.
You're wanting to choose one of a number
of senses of words such as star,
whether it's a rock star or this
astronomical object based on the evidence
of the words around it that
you see in the document.
And in these experiments,
what we were very careful to do is to
setup two models which were
exactly the same in all respects.
They had exactly the same features.
Exactly the same methods
of smoothing the data, but
differed only in whether we were
doing conditional estimation or
joint estimation and what do we see
in the results of these experiments?
What we see is well, if we just skip
first for straight to how it performs
on the test data, we see the good news
stories the conditional likelihood.
The conditional likelihood
is giving us performance,
that's 2.5% better than what we got from
the joint likelihood Naive Bayes model.
So, this joint likelihood
model is a Naive Bayes model.
And so, that's a nice gain and
something that is very appealing
when building practical NLP systems.
Incidentally, we can also notice something
interesting by looking at performance on
the training set.
If we look at performance on the training
set, the joint model gets 86.5%,
which goes up to 98.5 5% for
the conditional likelihood model.
You could think that that's good news,
but it's actually a cause for worry.
What you will find is that
conditional models can very easily
memorize much of training set.
And so they're prone to over
fitting by memorizing too much what
happened to be seen in training data,
which may not reappear in test data.
And so, we'll go on and
look at how to control this kind of
overfitting later on in this discussion.
That's a motivating introduction for
discriminative models and
discriminative estimation.
In the next section,
we'll start looking at how we can define
the features that are used in these
models and then go from there into
the details of how they're estimated.